Hi, and welcome to the lecture on
generalized linear models for binary data.
In this lecture, we're going to focus on
instances where the outcome is a zero,
one random variable.
So it can only take two levels.
And this occurs very
frequently in most analyses.
For example,
in biostatistics we're all for
doing things like survival analysis
where people are either alive or
dead at the end of the study,
for example, a cancer study.
We can look at wins versus losses, like
we're going to do today, or success or
failures of any kind.
And our model is going to be,
we're going to model the data as if it's
a bunch of coin flips, where a success
probability potentially depends
on a collection of covariates.
Now if you have any
collection of zeros and
ones where the success probability is
constant and they're independent, then
the total number of successes or failures
is a so-called binomial random variable.
Okay, so binomial random
variables are handled by binary
logistic regression in the special case
where the covariate is just constant.
Okay, so we're going to cover two cases,
binary and
binomial, by covering the binary case.
So, as a motivating example, let's look at
this data set that Jeff Leak organized.
Jeff Leak is another one of
the instructors in our data science
specialization.
He teaches the practical machine learning,
getting and
cleaning data and data scientist toolbox.
So in this case,
you can get the data here, but
it's also in the GitHub repository.
The data set here has the Ravens'
win number at ones versus zeros,
whether or not the Ravens won
coded as a factor variable,
wins versus loss, the score,
Ravens' score, and the opponents score.
Now on this case,
we're just going to look at
to what extent the Ravens' score
predicts whether or not they won.
Okay, so you can imagine, if you're in the
front office for the Ravens, who, I forgot
to mention this, the Ravens are a U.S.
American football and
a National Football League team and
based in Baltimore.
So we all love the Ravens around here.
So you can imagine, if you were in the
front office for the Ravens, wanting to
predict wins with a lot of covariates,
score would be one of them, opponent's
score would obviously be one of them, and
so on, but you'd want home versus away.
And I think you can understand
the principles of binary
logistic regression just by looking
at this example and, I hope,
extending it, given everything that we've
learned about multivariate linear models
will carry over very easily for you.
So I just want to remind ourselves,
we probably don't want to fit
this data with linear regression.
If we were to model the probability
of a Ravens win, the event of
a Ravens win one versus zero as a linear
progression we wouldn't be honoring,
this equation here wouldn't
actually hold true for sure, right?
Because usually we assume the errors
are Gaussian, just would not hold.
Now that isn't to say that occasionally
fitting binary data with a linear model is
the worst thing in the world to do.
But it's usually only a quick first thing
that you do before you then move on to fit
something like a logistic
regression model.
So here we fit the linear regression in R,
and you get the output, and
you see what the model
is trying to get at,
the model is the slope, is trying to
get at probability of a Raven's win.
However, you can get slope
estimates that are negative or
above one if you fit
a linear regression model.
Again, it's not the worst
thing in the world to do.
Sometimes, if you're doing something
quick, you have to do it, but
probably preferable would
be to model the odds.
So just to remind ourselves what the odds
are, if we have a binary outcome,
which in this case is whether or
not the Ravens win, we want to model
the probability that the Ravens win.
So I'm going to get me pen here.
The probability that the Ravens win, but
we're going to model it like
it's a bunch of coin flips.
However, the success probability
will differ from game
to game depending on how many
points the Ravens score, okay?
So, that's the probability we
want to model so, the odds.
The odds are defined as the probability
over one minus the probability, and
in a couple of slides,
I'll describe more about the history of
the odds and how people think about it.
You can go backwards, by the way,
from the odds to the probability.
In that the probability is equal
to the odds over 1 plus the odds.
Okay, you go forwards from the probability
to the odds by taking the probability over
1 minus the probability.
You can go backwards from
the odds to get the probability
by taking the odds over 1 plus the odds.
So the two things are exchangeable.
The log odds then is
just the log of the odds.
And we use that so commonly that we gave
it a name and it's called the logit.
So the logit is simply
the log of the odds.
So what we're going to do is put
the model on the log of the odds.
So, I think we've talked a lot about
linear versus logistic regression,
both in the last lecture and in this
lecture, describing what are some of
the considerations for why we want to
probably do this with logistic regression.
But the main thing is that the model
assumptions clearly don't hold for
linear regression.
They're obviously, the inferences
probably are not anywhere near correct.
Or we have no faith in them.
But let's just draw the connection
between the two so that we can relate
what we're doing in logistic regression
back to what we did in linear regression.
So for linear regression we built
models like this, where the outcome was
the intercept plus a slope
parameter times the predictor
plus an error term, which is a nice way
to write out the model and convenient.
But another way to right out this same
model is just to say that the expected
value of the outcome was
this linear relationship.
So the expected value of the outcome,
in this case, the expected value is
of a zero, one random variable.
The expected value of a zero,
one random variable is the probability.
So the expected value
of a fair coin is 0.5.
So instead of doing what
we do in linear regression,
which is to model the expected value
of the outcome directly on that scale,
why don't we model the expected
value of the outcome,
which is the probability, why don't we
model that with something like this,
e to the linear regression over
1 + e to the linear regression.
Well this, right here,
this equation, if we invert it and
if we work with it a little bit, we
get that it says that the log of the odds
is the linear regression relationship.
So what we're doing in binary
generalized linear models is,
in this particular logistic regression,
we're modeling our data
as if it was a bunch of coin flips where
the success probability changes with i.
And we're relating the coin,
that success probability,
to our regressors by taking the log of
odds associated with that probability.
So you can go backwards.
This is the log of the odds, okay?
You could go backwards to the probability
using this equation up here.
And I like to call e to
the a over 1 + e to the a,
this function that inverts the log
of the odds back to the probability,
I like to call it the xbit.
So the log of the odds
is called the logit.
I like to call the function
that goes backwards the xbit.
Okay, so that's all we're doing.
That's all we're doing.
But that's the clever bit of
generalizing your models.
We're not actually putting
the model on the scale.
the linear regressions parameters
defining inequality between the outcomes
and the linear regression parameters.
Instead we're saying that the outcome
depends on a probability distribution.
That probability distribution
depends on the success probability.
That success probability then
depends on the regressors.
Okay?
So interpreting logistic regression
is pretty straight forward,
and I should mention all the logs
that we do in these notes,
these are natural log, l-o-g,
meaning natural log in this case.
Most mathematicians, when they
write l-o-g they mean natural log.
So in this case what happens?
So if I were to plug in a zero for
the Ravens score I would just get b0.
So b0 is the log odds of a Ravens
win if they score 0 points.
Then e to the b0 over 1 + e to
the b0 would be the probability
that the Ravens won.
That's the model based probability that
the Ravens win if they score zero points.
Now in this case, this is maybe a not
perfect component of this model, because
it gets estimated to be non-zero, and
we know that the team can't
win if they score zero points.
They could tie, but they can't win.
So b1, okay, so remember, let me get,
Remember how we interpreted our
slope coefficient from before.
We have b0 + b1 and
let me put in the (RSi +
1)- b0 + b1 (RSi).
Okay, then let me put
brackets around that.
Okay, then that equation, if you work it
out, that equation works out be b1, okay?
So what is this?
This is the logit of the probability
that the Ravens win given the score + 1,
and this is the logit of the probability
the Ravens win given the score itself.
So what is b1?
It's the increase or decrease depending
on whether it's positive or negative
in the log odds of the probability that
the Ravens win associated with a one unit
increase in the regression variable, or in
this case, a one point increase in score.
Okay?
And if we exponetiate this,
remember that if this is
a difference on the log scale, so
if we exponentate it,
we get a ratio back on the original scale.
So if we exponentiate this,
we get that e to the b1 is then the ratio
of the odds comparing a one
point increase in score,
the ratio of the odds of the Ravens
winning for one point score increase.
Okay?
And we don't have multiple regressors like
we studied a lot in linear regression.
We don't have that for
this particular example, but
the extension is pretty direct.
Everything, just like in linear
regression, multi variable regression,
everything is just interpreted presuming
the other regressors are held fixed.
So remember our interpretation in
multivariable regression was that
the increase associated with a one
unit change in the regressor,
holding the other
regression variables fixed.
That same interpretation carries over
in logistic regression, e to the b1.
If we had a bunch of covariates
added in this, let's say whether or
not it was a home or away game,
if we had that one extra covariates added,
then e to the b1 would be the odds ratio
of a Ravens win for a one unit increase
in the score holding whether or
not it was an away or a home game fixed.
Okay, so
the logistic regression coefficients
are pretty easily interpretable.
The log is a nice function
that allows us to sort of
invert additive things and
turn them into ratios.
And people like to talk in terms or
ratios, so
it's a very nice interpretation.
I want to talk a minute
about the history of odds.
So it goes back to this
idea of a fair game.
So imagine if you're playing a game
where if you flip a coin with success
probability p, and
if it comes up heads you win X dollars.
If it comes up tails, the person you're
playing against wins Y dollars, and
you lose Y dollars.
Okay?
So what should we set X and
Y in order for the game to be fair?
Okay.
In this case,
the coin isn't necessarily a fair coin.
p is not necessarily 0.5.
So what is your expected earnings?
Well if you took the inference class you
would you know that your expected earnings
is how much you would win
given the coin came up heads,
minus how much you would
lose given the coin came up tails, okay?
And if we want it to be a fair game,
we want our expected earnings
to be equal to zero.
Well if we solve that,
we get Y / X = p / 1- p.
So, in other words,
the odds can be said as how much
would you be willing to pay for
a p probability of winning a dollar.
In other words, setting X equal to 1.
And then if p is bigger than 0.5
you'll have to pay more than you lose,
and p is less than 0.5 you'd have to pay
less than if you lose than if you win.
And so this is why,
if you go to the horse track
like Pimlico here in Baltimore, they'll
give you the odds against a horse winning.
So they'll say 10 to 1.
Why would they do that?
Because, if you bet a dollar, that would
mean if the horse won you got $10.
So you can do the calculation
very quickly in your head
because they're giving you fair game.
It's an interesting side note about
the horse betting analogy in that
the way in which they set
the probabilities for
horse betting is they do it in a way
adaptively as the bets come in.
The more people bet on a horse
the probability that their
odds that they say that
it's going to win goes up.
The odds that they says it's going to
lose goes down as more people bet on it.
And they do it that way, not because that
they think it's an accurate reflection of
whether or not the horse will win, but
just to balance the actual
money coming in and out.
So that if that horse wins or loses,
they know exactly how much
they would win or lose.
And they can balance it out that way,
so they're guaranteed to neither win nor
lose money.
But what's interesting about that is
over a long period of looking at horses,
that aggregate odds that
winds up from the betting,
that winds up being a fairly accurate
representation of the percentage
of times the horse wins,
which is interesting.
That just says that people
are somehow wise as a collective, and
they create an efficient, fair market for
gambling by virtue of betting
correctly in aggregate.
And then also you might wonder how
the casino or how the track makes money.
They make money by taking a little
bit of a fee for every bet.
So they are basically guaranteed to win,
so when the phrase,
the house wins, is literally true.
It means that the house is
basically guaranteed to win.
They set up the odds so that,
whether the horse wins or
loses, they're monetarily neutral, and
they take a little money off of each bet.
That's an interesting fact.
And of course, it's more complicated
than that because you've
got a big complex organization,
thousands of people running it.
So of course it's far more complicated
than that, but that's the gist of it.
So if you want a good risk-free position,
become a bookie.
So next up I'm going to show us how to
visualize fitting logistic regression
curves using a computer experiment.
So I look forward to seeing
you in that lecture.